today is the 120th day the american
hostages have been held captive in
tehran
and today marks the end of the first
week of the un tribunal's investigation
into the alleged crimes
of the deposed shah they have been asked
also to investigate iranian charges of
u.s
complicity in those acts why do so many
iranians believe
in u.s complicity guilt why do they so
fervently endorse the anti-american
commany and the holding of the hostages
of course we know the embassy takeover
was triggered by the shah's entry into
the u.s last
october for medical treatment more about
that later
but beyond that the fury in iran focuses
on the undenied fact that the cia
restored the exile shah to the peacock
throne back in 1953
and after that the iranians have been
told the cia helped the shah set up
sarak
the secret police force that has
tortured so many thousands of them
a classified senate foreign relations
committee report confirms the cia's role
in forming sarak
it says the cia provided the shah money
as well as training
for that purpose of course the brutality
came later
in 1976 in the abraham palace in tehran
i asked the shah about the continuing
reports of torture
inflicted by his savak upon so many of
his citizens
now when an outfit like the
international commission of jurists
comes here
and then comes out with a report saying
that in spite of what you say your
majesty
torture continues how do they know
well they can't continue saying this
well they talk about psychological and
physical torture
physical i don't believe i talk not
anymore maybe in the old days maybe
i talked just today
to a man whom i
believe who told about torture
how many years ago within
i want to be very careful
not yesterday ah well maybe
i don't know the word has gone out to
stop it
to stop what torture but a long time ago
yes
how long ago well i won't tell you as
you don't tell me
this was the man who told me just hours
before my interview with the shaw in the
fall of 1976
who told me about torture still going on
rajisam gavadi then a highly respected
iranian journalist who now reports for
time magazine
i spoke to him in new york a few days
ago when you told me back in 1976
october yes
that torture physical torture was still
going on how did you know it
my brother was released from jail
perhaps a week after
before i saw you there were torture
marks all over his body
the physical torture went on and the
psychological torture was worse than
physical torture my own brother a
political prisoner
was taken once to this dark
room and shown the mangled bodies
of a few persons and he was told
that relatives of his including his
brother
including his mother and his father were
among the corpses
and he was instructed to identify them
so he spent
hours and hours and uh trying to decide
whether the stump of a head this smashed
pulp of a
face belong to his brother to his mother
you mean you
yes and this was a deliberate lie but he
didn't know
so through a series of psychological
tortures as his majesty said
uh they drove him crazy insane and he
came out
thousands and thousands of dollars went
into his
treatment and uh even now
i can't say that he is a complete human
being rajisam kabati spoke then of an
episode that took place
on the occasion of president carter's
visit to tehran
on new year's eve december 1977.
we were celebrating the new year's eve
with the american press in the hilton
hotel
and mr carter was given a speech that
night
saying i don't i don't remember the
words exactly but he was saying that
america has never had such a good friend
america has never been so close
with another nation with another leader
and
it profoundly touches us that the shah
takes care of
his people so well and his people love
him so well
on that very night new year's eve said
some gabardi his brother was seized with
another fit
and he brought him to a mental hospital
close to the shah's palace
and a doctor there told me that
seventy percent of our cases are savated
people
it is 1978 about
two years perhaps 15 months after your
talk with the shah
and after his claim that torture is not
going on
max mccarthy three-term democratic
congressman now washington bureau chief
of the buffalo news
was press officer at the american
embassy in tehran in 76
he had put me in touch with some kabaddi
rajis
about his brother did you know the
brother i did
and he was uh imprisoned tortured
and i saw him afterward and the poor guy
was just a walking dead man i mean
he was a zombie as a result of torture
at the hands of sadaq
right a trial of two sabacc torturers
held in iran
after the fall of the shah one of a
score such trials during which these men
and others confess to heinous crimes
sticking hot iron bars in noses and eyes
hanging prisoners upside down to beat
them
using everything from thick whips to
electric shock
raping both male and female prisoners
torturing one member of a family in
front of the other
often victims were then forced to
swallow cyanide tablets
or taken out and shot some other victims
like this young iranian we filmed a few
weeks ago in a london hospital
were permanently crippled over three
years in an iranian prison he was
apparently subjected to repeated spinal
injections another form of torture
he is paralyzed unable to talk doctors
say he soon will die is it your
understanding that we
you in the embassy knew what was going
on with savak
well i did in fact it was such acts by
savak
and the indifference of the american
diplomatic establishment in iran to such
savagery
that caused max mccarthy to resign as
press officer there in late 1976
and he wrote a report following his
resignation in your report you say
u.s mission personnel are regularly
warned not to divulge to any american
correspondent
information that iranian government does
not want disclosed or which tells too
much about the u.s
role in iran you serious
that's right in other words dick helms
as ambassador would say
look the u.s role in iran we don't want
too much news of that in the american
press
correct ambassador helms was pro-shaw
right well he used to say there's no
alternative to the shah
which i suppose at that time americans
generally believed
and so in in being shaw you
you did what the show wanted you to do
in effect right there was a
that that was a very prevalent idea
giving the shot what he wants remember
there were articles to that effect and
and why was it so important to give the
shah what he wants
well because he was our pillar in the
persian gulf and we built our whole
security
on this one man all right therefore if
the shock committed excesses
we had to forgive that if we knew about
corruption that went on
right there were more transcendentally
important considerations than corruption
and repression
so the united states knew really what
was going on but was willing to say well
wait a minute
for the greater good of the greater
number of people let's turn our back on
these
brutalities excesses corruptions i
believe that's a fair statement
it was not just in iran in the late 70s
that americans knew what was going on
jesse leaf was iran analyst for the cia
in langley virginia
in the early 70s he had heard reports of
savak brutalities and he wanted to do
something about it
in fact at one point i was going to
write a report on torture in iran and it
was told not to
by by on division level
this was in what year i it was in
i can't give you an exact year i believe
it was 70
71 something like that well who was the
head of the cia at the time
well the house yeah at the thomas was
richard helms but um
he would have known about well you'd
either have to be
blind deaf and dominant presidential
candidate not to know there was torture
going on in
iran i mean it was all over the place
amnesty international has a huge file on
on what happened i i have seen from
various i
saw from various sources descriptions of
torture rooms in salvak headquarters in
tehran
we knew it was happening and we did
nothing about it
and i was told not to do anything about
it this was an eternal iranian
affair
job was to keep the lid on
this dissident elements within the
population originally it was communist
then
it meant anybody who said to look
crosswise at the shop
by definition mike an
enemy of the shah was an enemy of the
cia
they were we were very close we were
friend this was a very close
relationship
between the united states and iran what
do you know mr leaf
about the cia savak and torch
when the agency set up sabacc
they had regular
instructional classes part of the
instructional classes
were in interrogation techniques as part
of intensive interrogation techniques
torture is
covered that leaf says was a classroom
lecture
although one former savak agent still in
iran claims the cia actually showed
savage agents how to physically torture
prisoners
guys baloney especially coming from the
source i mean he's working for he's
working for the other side now
uh i mean he's testifying in order to
save his own life oh i think i think so
we didn't have to we didn't have to
teach the iranians torture i mean
or to torture people they have a long
long growing history in that part of the
world of torture so
it's an everyday thing so far we've been
talking about savak in iran
but what about sabat outside iran like
our own cia savak also conducted
operations abroad
here is a vivid example we first told
this tale three years ago on sixty
minutes
it's centered on this man then living in
paris jules canpira
an adventurer a soldier of fortune born
in the soviet union he lived
clandestinely in western europe a
stateless man
in and out of prison several times until
finally
he was granted an iranian passport and
went to work as a journalist in tehran
then he says he was contacted by savak
and sent back to france on a mission of
political assassination
his first target was to be sadek absalek
the man who was now
iran's foreign minister but who when we
first met him three years ago in paris
was a little-known supporter of an
iranian religious leader then in exile
in iraq
the ayatollah khamenei kanfira
instead of killing gobsadek told him the
whole story
and told him also that he had been
commissioned by savak
to kill another man an american nasser
afshar a wealthy businessman formerly an
iranian now an american citizen
whose home was in alexandria virginia
where he published the iran free press
a newspaper filled with attacks against
the shah his regime
and his family why would the savak want
to kill you nassar
because i'm the publisher of iran free
press
simplest my dear friend mike
i think this is very ridiculous auntish
years of haiti today lives in exile in
switzerland
at the time of our report on salah three
years ago
he was iran's ambassador to the united
states
we are not the people who want to kill
anyone
we had traitors in the past
many of them has come back even the
communists
but when we checked out kanpira's story
three years ago
it stood up we were satisfied he was
telling the truth
though every government agency we talked
to at the time denied it
the state department the cia no one knew
anything about it
or so they said and there the matter
stood until the senate foreign relations
committee investigated the activities of
foreign
intelligence organizations in the united
states including
we have secured a portion of that
classified report from dale vanetta of
jack anderson staff
and it confirms kanpira's story in every
detail
it says the cia had known of the afshar
assassination plot for more than a year
prior to our broadcast
that the bureau of intelligence and
research of the state department
had been told about it by the c i a and
that the u s
embassy in iran had also indicated that
one jules confira
had been trained in assassination
techniques
though kanpira never operated in the
of united st did how did we learn that
from the shah of iran himself when i
spoke to him in 1976
and they are there for the purpose of
checking up on iranian students
checking up on anybody who becomes
affiliated with
circles organizations
hostile to my country which is the role
of any intelligence organization
and they are there with the knowledge
and consent of the united states
government
i think it is that statement caused a
flap
henry kissinger categorically denied u.s
knowledge of sovak activity here but he
promised to make inquiries
two weeks later his aide robert fonseth
announced that after an investigation
the state department had
quote found no evidence of any illegal
or
improper activity well that was totally
misleading as the senate report makes
clear
the report confirms that savak's primary
function in the united states
was to spy on iranian dissidents like
these students
who could be targets for savak upon
their return to iran
and the report says also that the cia
itself furnished savak with information
gathered by the fbi
training of savage personnel continued
in the us
and the cia did not ask that savak
refrained from using in the united
states the surveillance techniques it
learned here
and during the court of years savak
activity continued here
in july of seventy eight according to
the washington post
then deputy attorney general civiletti
warns a big nief brzezinski
that sabach was involved in significant
police
security and non-diplomatic activity in
the us
but there is no indication the post said
that brzezinski made any move to tighten
control over savak's actions
why the reluctance of the united states
to crack down on savak
or even to send its agents home three
years ago
ambassadors of haiti answered my
question about that quite candidly
and if the us government tells iran to
pull its agents out of this country
if united states government does not
want it we
are not going to insist and we shall ask
them to leave
at the same time we shall ask your
people to leave my country
that threat coming from the shah himself
was repeated many times to us officials
in documents we have seen the united
states was not willing to pay that price
iran was a vital listening post for the
cia
with a thousand miles and more of border
with the soviet union
former cia officer now political science
professor richard cottom explains
the fact of the show allowed are
watching operations from iran
monitoring operations terribly important
to us
but i'd say more generally that wherever
you have this kind of liaison
relationship
with another service like savak
that the hold they have over you is very
substantial
our support for iran meant turning a
blind eye to the excesses of the shah
and according to khan it meant failing
to recognize the mounting opposition to
the shah inside iran
and he holds henry kissinger responsible
he coined the phrase
total commitment why look at a minor
group of opposition people and
gratuitously annoy the shah
when the operations that we do jointly
are so important to both countries
what you seem to be saying professor
cotton is that when the question
who lost iran is finally asked
henry kissinger's that is at the top of
your
culprits list i think henry kissinger's
idea
of diplomacy in this sense is is
intolerable
i believe that you should never be in a
position of not reading
the full breadth of public opinion in
any country
and kissinger to cut us off entirely
from
from a major popular force
i think is is to a very extensive
extent responsible for a lot of what's
happened yes
two events in 1978 infuriated and
unified the legions who oppose the shah
the january massacre in the holy city of
gom
by savak and the iranian police and then
as the opposition to the shah solidified
the tragic fire in the rex theater in
abaddon in august
hundreds died in that fire allegedly set
by savak
either to capture or kill several key
agents of the khamenei revolution known
to be inside
a man charged with some responsibility
for those two episodes was
razer razmi said by the present iranian
embassy in washington to be a savak
agent
he was police chief in com in january
and in abu dhabi in august
do you know the name yes who used to be
the police chief of the city of rome
he committed great atrocities there had
people
shot on the streets and he was taken to
abaddon
and promoted to a general's rank because
he had performed gallant
duty and um
in abu dhabi during his tenure that as
the police chief of the city
uh the rex cinema fire
a very controversial fire broke out in
which
about 600 people 500 people i don't
exactly remember a huge number
uh died were incinerated incinerated
policemen actually prevented the people
from breaking a hole
into the wall or somehow breaking the
walls down
or the doors down and getting the people
out today
that former chief of police reza rasmi
lives
under an alias in fresno california
we found him there and tried to talk to
him but he refused
we learned he had entered the united
states in january of seventy nine
the iranians have protested to the state
department what they call rasmus asylum
here they say they want him back in
tehran for trial
and the state department acknowledges
that an informal protest
was lodged with secretary vance last
october by iran's then foreign minister
ibrahim yazdi
and that vance promised to look into the
matter but said he would need evidence
on which to proceed
both sides agree the iranians have yet
to produce that evidence
the cia refused us any comment
whatsoever on rasmi
but the fbi told us they had learned the
date of his entry into the port of new
york
and after he settled in california they
said razzmi called the cia
for protection the fbi said the cia had
referred him to them
and the fbi office in san francisco
referred him to the local police
so the rasmi mystery remains and he
remains
in fresno we should make it clear that
no one we have spoken to
iranian or american has suggested there
was any collusion between american
authorities and the shah's officials
to arrange for rasmus entry into the
united states
in january of seventy nine joseph cisco
is today
chancellor of american university in
washington but for 25 years he was in
the state department his last chore is
under secretary to henry kissinger
and though he acknowledges the excesses
that took place in iran
he says there is another side to the
story the accomplishments of the shah
that too many people are right now
unwilling to credit what i'm trying to
suggest to you
is in the present emotional
environment take in iran do you think
that they're
either the commission or the people in
iran
the leadership in iran are able today to
look at this in the context
of 25 years of iranian-american
relationships
the very fact that the iranian u.s
relationship
provided a certain umbrella for iran to
permit
the country to develop economically to
education to be broadened to permit land
reform to permit
a new industrial uh class in other words
for there to be 20 or 25 years
of progress towards uh bringing iran to
a modern state if that is true i ask
cisco why did the iranians overthrow the
shah
why do they apparently hate him so
number of reasons uh
one no real opportunity for political
expression uh secondly uh
a certain amount of repression third
there's no question
uh mike that uh in and around the throne
uh corruption uh had developed i don't
say there weren't grievances
i think it's important however as we
look at this
to look at both the positive and the
negative elements understood
and we share a measure of responsibility
i don't i don't
uh either condone how much of a measure
of responsibility do you think that we
bear very difficult because what has
developed
is the myth of american control
in relationship to iran or
for that matter to third world countries
let me read to you from a senate foreign
relations committee report
with which i'm sure you're familiar in
the 1970s three or four
cia officials met weekly with their
savak counterparts to discuss common
interests
this was at a time when it was well
known that savak agents in the united
states
according to this same once secret
senate report
said significant police security and
non-diplomatic political activity is
carried out by savak
in the united states including quote the
planned assassination of a u.s citizen
by a man who told the cia
he had been tasked by savak to kill a
u.s citizen
just one example well you can't possibly
condone anything like that
and i don't think i don't know of anyone
who does
just today we're doing this interview on
monday february 25th
right just today mr cisco
iran's president banisade said that he's
amazed at the naivete of the united
states of u.s officials
and said that america still fails to
understand the revolution that overthrew
the shah
to break tehran's american hostage
stalemate says president
the united states could clear the
unfavorable climate in relations between
the two nations by conceding to iran
three demands this according to
president
assad they are admission of u.s
past wrongs a pledge not to interfere in
our internal affairs and future
and agreeing not to block our efforts to
get back the shah and the wealth of iran
he embezzled are those demands
in your i mean you're a trained diplomat
are those so unacceptable
mike in this situation uh
there could only be one negotiator
and that is the president of the united
states and he's vowed never to who has
all of the information at his disposal
grievances yes they can be aired and
they can be discussed
but not in circumstances why while
uh 50 americans are paying the price
they did not have the right to take the
hostages because hostage taken
in my book and in my value system is
thoroughly condemned
the american people do not owe it to the
iranians
okay to come out and confess guilt as
you say they owe it to themselves
they owe it to their constitution
they owe it to the concept of america as
a citadel of democracy and freedom
do you think that we are wrong
to bring out this material for the
american public at this time
no i don't think that uh you're wrong in
bringing out this material at this time
the reason why i was anxious to talk to
you
in response to your query is
that i felt that this material is quite
relevant
but it's important that this material be
evaluated by the american public by the
world
within the broad context of
iranian-american relationships
without condoning it i don't i'm not
condoning
these actions as you well know but
within the broad context of iranian
us relations as well as the positive
benefits to the west
and to the iranian people over a period
of a quarter of a century like six
presidents and six secretary states
just can't be totally wrong
nevertheless it was the decision of this
president and this secretary of state
their decision to permit the shah to
enter the united states last october
that triggered the capture of the
embassy in the taking of the hostages
a decision about which they'll have some
tough questions to answer once the
hostages are free
for example was the admission of the
shah to the united states
an instant response to the plea of a
desperately sick man
not according to a state department
contingency document
classified secret sensitive and entitled
planning for the shah to come to the
united states
written three months before the shah's
arrival it says that once the khomeini
regime is firmly established
quote it seems appropriate to admit the
shah to the united states
three months later he arrived presumably
for emergency medical treatment
but washington had been warned by the
embassy in tehran
a cable from the charges there said i
doubt that the shah being ill would have
much
ameliorating effect on the degree of
reaction here
about that reaction the state department
reported spelled out
the danger of hostages being taken and
went on
when the decision is made to admit the
shah we should quietly assign
additional american security guards to
the embassy
to provide protection for key personnel
until the danger period is considered
over
according to henry precht head of the
iranian desk in the state department
those guards were never provided and
finally on the issue of whether the
iranians had assured the americans that
they would protect the embassy
if the shah were to come to the united
states the americans say the iranians
pledged they would
but yesterday iran's former foreign
minister ibrahim told me
that when informed officially just 24
hours before the arrival of the shah in
new york
yazdi says he warned the state
department
you are playing with fire there will be
a very drastic reaction
and on that subject when president
carter asked secretary vance
if the embassy could be protected the
secretary told me friday
we said we could but we didn't